Dance music and I are done. Our relationship lasted my whole adult life, and I feel heartbroken. It became too apparent that feelings of disconnect, sadness, resentment and grief had been rife for some time. To rescue the rest of my relationship with music, I have stopped going to parties and taken a deliberate step away from the incessant churn of promotion and newness. I’ve come to think dance music needs hospicing.

When I say that dance music needs hospicing, I am not declaring dance music dead, nor proclaiming that things were better in a previous era (the most tired of takes); far from it. My sense is that certain niche sounds and scenes are flourishing. There is more music released every day than in the entire calendar year of 1989 ([Music Radar, via First Floor](https://firstfloor.substack.com/p/first-floor-243-if-an-album-gets)). Sure, a lot of it is drivel; much is ‘ambient slop,’ and much churned out by fake artists manufactured by streaming giants ([No Tags 40 with Liz Pelly](https://notagspodcast.substack.com/p/40-liz-pelly)). But if we want to talk quality and not quantity, there is still no shortage of weird, wonderful music. Just last year, I expressed exasperation at hearing too much good music at a festival, frustrated at my inability to absorb or appreciate any more.

At the same time, I have felt the downwards pressure of long-term decay—a microcosmic pattern of wider economic decline, downwards mobility, elite overproduction and existential malaise. While the electronic music industry at large is valued at an all-time high ([Beatportal, via First Floor](https://firstfloor.substack.com/p/the-business-of-dance-music-is-booming?publication_id=11024&post_id=163378412&isFreemail=true&r=scdr&triedRedirect=true)), indie label boss friends report that they’ve never seen numbers so low. Artists that can make a living are likely legacy ([Nemesis](https://nemesisglobal.substack.com/p/no-new-music-culture-after-youth)), and largely reliant on short-haul flights and an average carbon footprint of 17x that recommended as a personal carbon budget ([Last Night a DJ Took Flight](https://cleanscene.club/)).

Venues here in the UK are shuttering at an astonishing rate (one every fortnight, [NME](https://www.nme.com/news/music/grassroots-music-venues-uk-mvt-report-2024-closing-government-action-needed-kate-nash-parliament-3832257)); the ones that survive are just scraping by (with profit margins of <1%, [Music Venues Trust](https://www.musicvenuetrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2025/01/MVT_2024-Annual-Report.pdf.pagespeed.ce.MwmWup2td0.pdf)). We share fewer and fewer centralised cultural moments; this, I think, is thanks to a myriad of factors including personalised recommendation structures (e.g. playlists), individualised social media feeds, the folding of traditional media, the fact that writers are no longer in a room together sharing and discussing new music with one another (thanks Chal). I cannot tell you the last pop record that all of my friends listened to (no, *brat* did not make the cut), or that all of them were talking about (okay, it might qualify here).

Amidst the democratisation of music production and distribution technologies, I’ve heard DJ friends lament the amount of ‘solid’ music arriving in their inboxes each day, sharing a sense of overwhelm. Until hitting unsubscribe, I felt a sense of dread opening my inbox on Bandcamp Fridays, already feeling information-fatigued and overwhelmed by a never-ending deluge of music, content, and all else.

Where I’m going with all of this is that much feels untenable, that something must give and until it does there may be space for agency. It is, to say the least, an interesting time to be alive.

But amidst all of this change, amidst the shifts in my own relationship with dance music and parties, I have been fantasising about what dance music *could* look, feel, sound like and be. I don’t have any answers to this, and indeed I don’t think that I should (nor do I think anyone who peddles ‘the’ answer should ever be trusted!). Whatever I *can* envision is severely limited by the dance music I know and have experienced (largely in the professionalised scenes of European capitals), and I think the dance music of my dreams can only be arrived at through experimentation, cultivation and emergence.

Last year, I encountered a book called *Hospicing Modernity*. (Thanks [Jay Springett](https://thejaymo.net/2025/07/05/2517-its-beginning-to-feel-a-bit-like-the-future/) and Fran Edgerley.) Attention already fragmented, I decided to just read the intro before realising it was a book that would change me. It is one of the most challenging books I have ever read, not for its language or density, but for the way it upends, unsettles and confronts much that is deeply rooted and internalised within.

While writing ‘Unsustainability’ and grappling with how our dance music practices and industry were not sustainable on seemingly any level (from personal precarity and hurt to global ecological crisis), reading *Hospicing* changed how I was sensing, feeling and imagining all of this change. In the book, Vanessa Machado de Oliveira advocates for “learning to offer palliative care to modernity dying within and around us;” acknowledging that:

> “most people will not willingly let go of the enjoyments and securities afforded by modernity: they will not voluntarily part with harmful habits of being that are extremely pleasurable. However, our collective unconscious knows that the enjoyments and securities promised by modernity cannot be endlessly sustained.”
> 

A lifelong love of mine, dance music (as we know it) is one such ‘enjoyment’. Yes, with its glitz of individual ego and genius—but also with its spectacular, platform-mediated sheen and its fashion and conspicuous consumerism. I know many will not be able to let it and its extractive practices go easily.

If you’re reading this, I suspect you’re ‘in the music world’ in some capacity and I’m wondering how reading this makes you feel. Where does the emotion sit in your body? What qualities does it have? What parts of you are expressing opinions most loudly? What are dissenting voices saying? Maybe now is a good time to caveat that none of this is personal, and if any of this sparks shame or anxiety I want to underscore that it’s far from my intention to throw shade at anyone invested in or, indeed, dependent on dance music (as many of my loved ones are!). My intention here is to take a step back and grapple with dance music’s extractive realities, as well as recognise its limits and potential gifts—in the name of grafting new variations and nurturing meaningful diversity.

Some of us in this amorphous space oriented around amplified, repetitive rhythms may be ardently anti-capitalist, some of us (okay maybe not in my immediate circles) may be reformists and liberals. Further afield are the unabashed capitalists (I’m thinking of anyone from the members of [Housekeeping](https://thequietus.com/opinion-and-essays/black-sky-thinking/housekeeping-faces-review/) to KKR, [the genocide-supporting majority owners of Superstruct](https://www.bdsmovement.net/news/boycott-sonar), and thus Boiler Room, Sonar, and others).

While promo enjoys framing dance music as an oft-toted “site of resistance”, which I know there is truth in, I think this tired, romantic framing lacks substance. What exactly is being resisted and how? These are so rarely named that the term ‘resistance’ itself becomes a hackneyed phrase parroted by promoters left right and centre (yes I’m pleased with that one), deeply entangled with the interests of capital—from embeddedness in the attention economy to reliance on booze sponsorships and budget airlines, or hidden ownership structures making it all possible. Materially, I think these logics are just capitulated to, time and time again.

For a long time now I have not been interested in cosmetic diversity and the tokenism it gives rise to. A shallow way of appearing to ‘do politics’ while not grappling with material realities and their harms, it doesn’t remake the status quo in any meaningful way. It doesn’t build structures or make practices anew, opting instead for swapping in shiny new characters in well-worn roles. And furthermore, a point that I have long found missing from conversations around inclusion and diversity is that the flipside of inclusion is assimilation and, beyond that, nothing can be safe, inclusive, accessible for everyone simply because we have different wants and needs. Echoing what [Dhanveer Singh Brar](https://www.youtube.com/live/W-Y09AwhQn0?feature=shared&t=5725) said of drill, \*not everything’s for everyone and that’s okay.

Critics of the inclusion, diversity and equity space will point out that it has its costs, that it is tokenistic, that it requires meeting institutions and practices on their own terms. What is diversity worth if it is merely including marginalised bodies in the same old extractive structures and practices that have given us the precarious, damaging landscape of today? What is diversity worth if it’s not facilitating kinder, more equitable, life-giving structures and experiences? Are expensive festivals headlined by marginalised bodies ferried from gig to gig via private jet the marker of liberation? I’m being facetious here, of course, but you get my point. I am not interested in the same old for-profit entities run by more diverse peoples. I am wary of the liberation supposedly promised by bringing more marginalised peoples into precarious, damaging, high-carbon work. I am suspect of cosmetic politics! I want organisations that are structurally, economically, relationally, affectively different and diverse. I want us to be economically, legally, emotionally literate.

At the same time, I want to be clear that I recognise this terrain as one that de Oliveira might call ‘low intensity struggle’. Dance music is far from the most pressing of matters, but it’s something that matters to me (and I imagine you, too). In the face of an industry that’s been dying as long as I’ve known it, *how can we imagine a music that is not danced to at the expense of others?*

Maybe this is a lesson in learning to let go, cultivate strategic indifference ([Conflict of Disinterest](https://thejaymo.net/2024/06/29/2413-conflict-of-disinterest/)). It certainly has been for me and this is still a muscle I’m training.

De Oliveira speaks of learning to thank modernity for its lessons and gifts—and in dance music I find many that have been deeply transformative for me. I don’t think I need to explain the meaning, joy, catharsis and community I found through dubstep, hardcore, deep techno, dnb, and dub. But if we do not look away from *the reality that dance music as we know it will not and can not be sustained*, maybe we can find a provocation to start moving towards and cultivating other dance musics. What I am learning in the deeply transformative work of De Oliveira is how to shift “our ways of relating in order to breathe and to move together with maturity, sobriety, discernment, and accountability.” I mean this in terms of sounds, yes, but also parties and practices.

As we think about hospicing dance music, I find joy, reassurance and excitement in thinking about what it is that we want to cultivate ([On Repetition in Black Culture](https://www.scribd.com/document/208431820/James-Snead-On-Repetition-in-Black-Culture)). In dance musics to come, I think there *will* be a *meaningful* diversity of different practices, formats and parties. I’m excited by the politicised somatic work done by Healing Justice London or Camille Sapara Barton. I’m changed by the challenging, imaginative work of Vanessa Machado de Oliveira and adrienne maree brown.

In dance music I find at best opportunities for embodied and collective joy and catharsis; in those rare but precious moments I find glimpses of the sublime; in my most optimistic hopes I find entryways to politicised somatics (across the work of [Eris Drew](https://journalofthemotherbeat.substack.com/p/integrations-no-2-solstice-june-3) or [Sapara Barton](https://camillesaparabarton.com/tending-grief-book/), I know I’m not alone in this) and avenues through which to practically experiment in organising and building together. And at worst (I’m doing that conflation thing I lamented before) I find spaces full of superficiality and boring, status quo clout concerns; preoccupied with status and spectacle; suffuse with a kind of conspicuous consumption that has never aligned with my politics; that facilitate substance misuse and abuse; that leave me feeling alienated and saddened.

As [Michelle Lhooq wrote](https://www.ctm-festival.de/magazine/club-sober) of the sober experience, there’s something fundamentally anti-capitalist about the idea of saying that one’s experience, one’s possessions, is ever *enough*—and, indeed, that tracks with a lot of thinking around non-attachment. In my efforts to compost myself, I’ve been looking at my own relationship with music, which *has* been accumulation and consumption focused (always needing *more* music, to keep up to date…). I can’t help but feel the partially unfulfilling music collection I have amassed also [needs kondo-ing](https://nonogigsta.substack.com/p/surviving-a-hurricane-at-sea-version?publication_id=68368&post_id=163432667&isFreemail=true&r=scdr&triedRedirect=true).

A culture of shallow metrics, incessant promo and Easyjet touring is on its way out, whether through a decline supported by intention, care and deliberation or through one blighted by ignorance, fear and surprise. (Indeed, it will decay amidst all of these and more, and there are worlds of difference between compost and landfill, between the million different ways to end or transition.) But I find glimmers of dance music otherwise in a whole host of places and times. I have felt, heard and moved in them: for instance at the secret little party I go to on a farm in Wales; dancing grief with Camille Sapara Barton; the silly absurd joy that is Bangface; the empowering, soft yet heavy multi-generational sessions run by Jah Shaka (rest in power); the rare free party; the freeing movement session; the funeral; the members only parties and festivals.

On this journey, I’m just taking my first steps. Reading *Hospicing* (so recently) was transformational for me and I think it is relevant across all scales, all terrains. It has implications across the fractal scales of a struggling artist, a teetering venue, a scene, an industry, a planet*. Can we hospice dance music as one cell, one extremity, of its music or culture industry limb? Of modernity at large?

While our wider world burns, fractures and decays, life goes on. I see this in the resilience of the communities around me, I see this in the tiny plants sprouting through paving on my street, I see this in the abundant flora in my neighbourhood cemetery, I feel this in the joys in my life amidst a terrifying political landscape. Amidst the ramping up of racist immigration raids in the US, where I’m from. Amidst the authoritarian clampdown on protest rights in the UK, where I live. Amidst livestreamed genocide, record-breaking weather, and all other terrors made mundane that we acclimatise to. In cracks, somewhere, there will always be need and want for dancing, shared joy, embodiment and presence.

I note glimpses, spectres, of another dance music in sober spaces. Clubs that sell booze. Mushroom parties. Venues that meet popular accessibility standards. Rickety squats. Meditation retreat-festivals. Music that goes on forever. Early nights. Day parties. Ecstatic dance. Dancing ecstatically in your living room.

If it sounds romantic, it’s because it is. What else would I want my relationship to music to be?

*\* I dislike using this word because it connotes separability; what we’re actually speaking of here is our home, and source of sustenance and life. But if we read it literally, I also think that it is false–even if conditions conducive to human life have been eroded, the crust, mantle and core of this planet will keep ticking on.*