1. 

To speak of (un)sustainability is to speak of endings.

When something is said to be unsustainable, what is meant is that it *will cease to continue.* It will end.

Sometimes I wonder if we spoke of violence towards life, or of ‘endings’, would conversations about the ‘environment’ be given more body, more urgency? ‘Life’, here, of course includes human but also the complex assemblages of plants, animals and bacteria that directly and indirectly sustain and comprise us. These are what we are necessarily speaking of.

I marvel at how, day-to-day, we can refer to so many things as being unsustainable, without really considering: *how will this thing or practice cease to be?*

Whether that ending is deliberate, democratic and managed, or whether it is accidental, catastrophic and uncontrollable is another question. There's a world of difference between the image of industries and corporations crashing down as the neoliberal Jenga tower falls, versus the image of them being carefully and intentionally dismantled whilst minimising unintended damage. While capitalist-colonialist-modernity will somehow, someday not persist, which worlds have not sustained? Which worlds have ended, are ending and will end in the meantime? After all, *imperialism and ongoing (settler) colonialisms have been ending worlds for as long as they have been in existence* (Kathryn Yusoff, [A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None](https://www.upress.umn.edu/9781517907532/a-billion-black-anthropocenes-or-none/)).

So what kind of endings can be envisaged for the things we deem unsustainable today? I’m thinking of factory farming, single use consumer plastics, the flight industry, poorly insulated homes. Do shoddy homes burn or become subsumed by the sea in extreme weather events, in dramatic displays of climate myopia? Or do they cease to exist because they were gradually and carefully retrofitted, or because their inhabitants were safely evacuated before risk became too great? Do they end in shock, pain and loss because of a wilful ignorance of the state of things, or has their transition to a different state been managed, planned for and welcomed?

2. 

I first experienced climate anxiety as a kid; I couldn’t say exactly how old I was but I have a vivid memory of conducting my own (undoubtedly un-rigorous) science experiment around the age of seven. My experiment consisted of trying to melt some ice cubes in a glass of water to see if the total volume would change, so I could figure out if my nightmares of sea level rise, flooding and drowning were at all plausible.

An anxious child preoccupied with death, aging and terrorism (yes, I was an anxiety-predisposed child with access to CNN in post-9/11 America), I started having visions of grand floods shortly after learning about the greenhouse effect in school. My elementary school imagination pictured myself and loved ones buoyed into the sky by rapidly rising floods, reaching the threshold of the ozone layer and being thrust into space, where we would combust. The logic in my head went: if there’s no gravity to pull the matter of our flesh inwards, it must explode or cease to be held together in one continuous mass.

Today I regard this with a mixture of humour and sadness, but back then it was just fear.

As I got older, my climate anxiety had dissolved into an ambient dread that failed to offer any corporeal or vivid imagery. The term ‘environment’ functioned as some kind of vague, green abstraction—‘sustainable’ as some kind of general, ‘good for the environment’ type of *vibe.* In this kind of usage, ‘environment’ referred to a patch of trees a million miles away. The word did not refer to the air you and I breathe, the water we drink, the food we eat. It was not the microplastics that we ingested, it was not the abnormally cold summer your co-worker complained about nor the record-breakingly warm autumn they rejoiced in. It was not the food that we would *not* be eating because it died as a result of unusual weather or drought. Funnily, ‘environment’ here was abstract, made immaterial.

After the period of abstraction, my fears crystallised again. While living in Berlin in the late 2010s, I became more literate in the systems my life is enmeshed in. I learned about how shareholder capitalism worked; what ‘profit motive’ and ‘growth imperative’ referred to; why some argued against nuclear energy, others ardently for, and others for an energy mix; how rotational grazing improves carbon drawdown; what the three sisters companion planting method was. Literacy in these matters felt imperative.

When *the scale of argument is shifted from a planetary one to a local one, different pictures emerge* (Adrian Lahoud, [Floating Bodies](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/187118443.pdf)). Nevermind the problematics of speaking on global averages, which obscures specific harms (and their uneven distribution) to specific localities and peoples. I began thinking of *slow violence* massacres, perpetratorless crimes, occurring without a single, pinpointable offender to hold accountable. I thought of climate genocide, of swathes of brown and black people living in the parts of the world that would soon become uninhabitable (or had already become so but only sporadically). As my climate literacy improved, I imagined Berlin’s heat increasing by 7°C. I thought of how insane it is that climate change gets communicated in global averages, that a catastrophic increase of 3°C is a figure that includes ocean surface temperatures. I thought about what that would feel like on land (5°C) and in cities (7°C). Never cross a river that is, on average, a meter deep, as some say.

I thought about what it would feel like in my body and in my head to experience that heat—the anxiety that accompanies, whirring yet lethargic, slowed but not extinguished. On hot days or in hot saunas, I wondered to myself how long one could survive in the absence of cool water. I thought about apathy, distraction, systematic inertia.

My visions alluded to an image I wouldn’t be able to see until I read Kim Stanley Robinson’s [*Ministry for the Future*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ministry_for_the_Future) (which I have heard people refer to as anything from “the bible” to simply “a bad read”). There was something uncanny about experiencing my anxieties given body, if even ‘just’ through prose. It opens with a vivid depiction of the stuff of a more recent climate fear–amidst a blistering heat wave that is smothering India. The speculative fiction begins in an unnamed town, where the ambient temperature exceeds the wet bulb temperature (the point at which there is so much humidity in the air that your sweat can no longer evaporate to cool you down). The heat stretches on for days. There is no AC, there is no relief. 42 degrees, humidity 60 percent. Mass death arises.

> At the lake they found a desperate scene. There were many, many people in the lake, heads dotted the surface everywhere around the shores, and out where it was presumably deeper there were still heads, people semi-submerged as they lay on impromptu rafts of one sort or another. But not all of these people were alive. The surface of the lake seemed to have a low miasma rising out of it, and now the stink of death, of rotting meat, could be discerned in one’s torched nostrils.
> 

In [*Golden Gulag*](https://cominsitu.wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/gilmore-ruth-wilson-golden-gulag-2007.pdf), the abolitionist theorist Ruth Wilson-Gilmore defines racism as “state-sanctioned…group-differentiated vulnerability to premature death.” This maps very neatly onto this scenario.

Who are the 1-3bn people set to be living in places seeing ≥29C mean annual temperatures by 2070 (a climate range today only seen in regions like North Africa, southern China and the Mediterranean)? How are their bodies racialised, gendered and classed?

In the summer of 2019, a heat wave saw temperatures reach 37.5 °C in Berlin, and 40.5 °C in North Rhine-Westphalia (a national record at the time). Heat-related deaths in Germany for that calendar year were estimated at 6900. I wondered who these people were, what demographics they belonged to, what circumstances they lived in. I wondered how these statistics they comprised would be narrativised and understood.

The first-floor altbau apartment I lived in at the time stayed fairly cool. My room faced northwest, and I hid out there, thinking of mass death, feeling like I was the only one accompanied by such visions.

Today I think about seeing the effects of the cost of living crisis manifest in my current hometown of London—a vibrant and stimulating shithole, as a former co-worker once (accurately) described it. Things are dire now, and I wonder how they will evolve as flooding and extreme heat continue to [render infrastructure futile](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2022/jul/19/two-uk-rail-mainlines-close-track-heat-east-coast), as crop failure and other rising infrastructure costs continue to push the cost of food up.

I think of mundane food shortages that I have noticed Brits enjoy as conversational anecdotes that function, depoliticised, like the weather—peppers or tomatoes missing at Sainsburys. I think about the catastrophic lack of community infrastructure and resilience that could counter the effect of food poverty on the most vulnerable households. I wonder what happens to our social fabric as more die from the effects of extreme weather, as the chasm between those who can afford to escape or insulate their homes and those who can’t becomes evermore pronounced. I think of the palpable increase of people sleeping rough in the city in recent years, and imagine what that looks like when more lose their homes to flooding, when the price of housing elsewhere goes up in accordance and food prices inflate and the cost of living continues to balloon. I think of the pain of the vulnerable but also of the existential panic that privileged people like me, insulated from the worst of these effects, will feel as we witness their brunt, as we come to terms with the fact that the futures we planned for are not materialising.

I think I am crazy because of the dissonance between these preoccupations and the polite small talk I end up making about the weather being uncomfortable, as I go about my day like a normal person.

3. 

The trouble with slow violence is that it is slow; it is diffuse, it stretches beyond the comprehensible. There is no lone perpetrator, no definable face to lay blame on. There is you and me. There could be a superpolluter or a fossil fuel exec, but when there is also no clear victim, no discrete violent event, there can be no easy wrongdoer.

Where in the world does the carbon emitted from a flight I took go? If I offsetted it, will that tree be cared for into maturity, and if so by whom (a member of the eco-precariat?), and are they being paid properly, and whose land was it anyway? What are the metals that comprised the plane, where were they extracted and by whom? Who are the precarious and exploited labourers who mined the lithium and cobalt in my laptop? (Were they so-called “artisanal miners”?) Who are the people living in the polluted and water-depleted areas surrounding the mining? Who are the beings that died as a result?

Slow violence *occurs gradually and out of sight, a violence of delayed destruction that is dispersed across time and space, an attritional violence that is typically not viewed as violence at all…playing out across a range of temporal scales* (Rob Nixon, [Slow Violence](https://www.hup.harvard.edu/books/9780674072343)). This refers to *calamities that patiently dispense their devastation while remaining outside our flickering attention spans—and outside the purview of a spectacle-driven corporate media. The insidious workings of slow violence derive largely from the unequal attention given to spectacular and unspectacular time*.

It has long felt like a crucial oversight to me that the broadly political and ostensibly anti-racist music world in which I find myself seemingly has so little consideration for the climate crisis. I think the reasons for this are manifold, including that climate change has various communications problems (including but not limited to the ones I’ve laid out above); that environmentalism has a branding issue (climate activism is for the white middle class); and that we are all, to varying degrees, deeply complicit. As the adage goes, it’s hard to get someone to understand something that their salary depends on them not understanding. Can one reconcile these urgencies with the material life one leads? How can one hold these terrors alongside the desires, dreams and lives we were encouraged to cultivate? If they are fundamentally incompatible, can we grieve and hospice the values we once cultivated? 

I’m under no illusion about the impact or scale of individual consumer decisions, nor about their rhetorical history; I’m thinking here of the well-known anecdote that BP was, in fact, behind the invention of the carbon footprint in the first place (the concept ultimately served to individualise responsibility for the climate crisis and detract from industry). Here arises a question of impact.

But complexity and entanglement abound! It feels impossible to sift through these knots, to be able to locate that suffering in the first place. It is also an impossible demand to be literate enough in supply chains, manufacturing, logistics and labour to fully apprehend what each act, what each good, materially depends on.

When harm is so ambient, so entwined with everything else, what is the point of trying to withdraw or minimise? How can that be held alongside the knowledge that change at smaller scales is necessary, if insufficient? To me, the chorus of “this doesn’t make a difference” rhetoric overlooks the *harm* that something, whether an act (taking a flight, asking ChatGPT a question) or an object (a laptop, a plastic bag), inflicts. While access to global pain and suffering has been enabled by advancements in media technologies, *we have not developed the capacity to be with that increased awareness of suffering* (zen teacher Angel Kyodo Williams, in adrienne maree brown’s [Emergent Strategy](https://adriennemareebrown.net/book/emergent-strategy/)).

Maybe the case of litter makes impact (and thus harm) more legible; there is something tangible and discrete about not leaving some plastic or a can in a park, but all that is solid really melts into air when it comes to aviation. It is difficult in this context because the slow and diffuse quality of climate violence means that we can’t clearly equate one less flight taken to one less person displaced. My indirect and abstracted benefit from the violences above makes it easy to absolve myself of responsibility.

But having seen the messy, necessary entanglement and the fuzzy cloud of impact, I cannot look past harm. I don’t think that most people who avoid littering think they’re making much of a difference to global pollution when they abstain, but I will project some sense of personal responsibility or culpability onto their decision. Some level of harm is *directly* visible, *directly* traceable to their action. Sometimes I think the harm angle is important, and at other times I think it is individualising and loses sight of real culpability and scale. Maybe this is all ego-centric anyway, serving only to placate my own anxieties and nurture my fantasy of agency.

In Robert Watt’s “[The fantasy of carbon offsetting](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09644016.2021.1877063)”, he examines the practice from a psychoanalytical angle, considering how a false belief in the efficacy of offsetting is one perpetuated by the mind in order to enable practitioners to sustain their vision / version of reality, clinging onto senses of agency and middle class lifestyles. Is there a way of apprehending the incommensurate difference of scale between the average Global North consumer and an oil exec? Would that absolve any of the rest of us from ways of living dependent on extracting from and exploiting others?

When I say ‘us’ I am making several assumptions here. I’m not speaking of a universal figure, but assuming that the identities of my (undoubtedly small) readership will have some kind of commonality with my own. I’m assuming that you, reader, are a Global North resident, middle class, share some degree of political affinity with me, and likely have a degree or two. I’m assuming that you, like me, endeavour to not be a super polluter, to make relatively ethical consumer choices where possible whilst permitting some degree of vice, whether that is an Amazon habit, meat eating or what have you.

Somehow, in myself and in my own life, I often find the decision to abstain to be one worth making. Don’t get me wrong, I have my vices too–and I don’t judge others for theirs (or maybe I do at my most scared). But my piece of trash is, cleanly and clearly, *my* piece of trash–isn’t it?

Through the parallel, routine acts of composting and looking at the waste I produce each day, I accidentally meandered away from the individualised personal-responsibility narrative I tried to embody earlier in my life (indeed, as a young adult I thought living one’s politics manifested in carrying a tote bag to the shop). I found that I had semi-accidentally cultivated my way to an embodied sense of interdependence, or what the zen teacher Thich Nhat Hanh might term inter-being. Fertilised by the work of queer, feminist and zen teachers, I was startled to feel an intimate sense of the old axiom that one cannot do harm to another without doing harm to oneself. (This sense is as temporary and as in need of tending as anything else.) The questions that preoccupied me became less concerned with personal responsibility and impact, and more with how I relate to other beings and the wider world.

How do old habits die?

4. 

Some years ago, I heard [solarpunk Jay Springett](https://thejaymo.net/solarpunk/) say that he had done his climate grieving and had moved on to a more proactive place. The mere idea of this boggled my mind. Yet–miraculously–after years of terror, after I was able to look directly at my fear, I was no longer paralysed by it. I was able to acknowledge the dire, wretched reality of how things are, but also hold at the same time the abundant paths through. It feels like an eternal contradiction of this space—to accept the demands of the situation without apathetically accepting the sheer amount of suffering, displacement and death that is on the horizon. To hold *urgency without despair* (Rob Burbea, [The Loving Kindness (Metta) Retreat](https://dharmaseed.org/retreats/1084/)). I hear that delicate dissonance between that pain, but also the possibility and potential.

For me, so much of this work has been to let go of avoidance and stay with the trouble, grapple with the Gordian knot in all its complexity and immensity. There must be a way through. What ways of living might continue or might we transition to, and what are their capacities for embodied pleasures, for joy?

On that way, I have seen maps; I have sensed spectres. Amidst mental tumult and despair, I have noticed paths that others have identified, charted and practised. I have seen the resilience of life and its ability to persist in beautiful ways, through hostile conditions.

When I walk past unused yards and barren urban greenspace, I think about how anything from guerilla gardening or some kind of state-funded climate corps could utilise them for food production, biodiversity uplift, carbon storage and ecosystem education. When I take the train past sprawling monocrop farms I think of the wealth of space that could be transformed by agroecological growing, the rich and diverse assemblages of species that could live there, the abundance of food that could be produced. There is abundant opportunity to support land and life in its varied forms, to cultivate embodied and practical knowledges.

When I look at the city, I see empty properties that can be repurposed into adaptable community spaces. I see people prototyping and practising for social infrastructure that can grow into mutual aid, in the various places and ways in which the state falls short. I see so much trash that can be repurposed and re-circulated, and an abundance of space that can be utilised for soft densification.

Like Kim Stanley Robinson gave body and detail to my terrors, [Birmingham’s Civic Square translated](https://medium.com/neighbourhood-public-square/3%C2%BAc-neighbourhood-582903b050b2) abstract, global needs into local possibilities, crafting detailed visions for genuinely sustainable infrastructures and practices in the city. [London’s House of Annetta](https://houseofannetta.org/), my meditation group/s and an informal UK land justice network have taught me how to think, teach and learn with others; and shown me what embodied practices of care look and, crucially, *feel* like. My queer-, black- and feminist- teachers taught me what it is to learn and move with humility, pleasure, joy. Indeed, “the path should be joyful, nourishing, and healing” (Thich Nhat Hanh, [*Zen and the Art of Saving the Planet*](https://plumvillage.org/books/zen-and-the-art-of-saving-the-planet)).

Can we speak of endings that are life-giving, rather than life-ending? I’m thinking of the end of a punitive, carceral criminal justice system; the end of planting sprawling monocrop plantations reliant on industrial fertilisers… the end of a way of organising society that systematically denies the lived needs of all beings. How can we facilitate managed endings, gentle transitions to afterlives, careful replacements and life-giving successions? Can we do this while remaining cognizant of *whose* lives, livelihoods and lifestyles come to an end in the near future?

Sometimes it feels effortless and at others my arms feel as if they could stretch no further, trying to hold the impossible contradictions and interdependencies that make up a life today. All the liberatory joy I have felt on a dancefloor has been entangled with extraction and fossil-enabled transport, the affordable food I eat undoubtedly dependent on the extraction of labour from precarious migrant workers, fed in turn by fossil fuel-based fertilisers. My material impact is both outsized, as a middle class Global North resident, and negligible when viewed at the scale of the matter. That the climate crisis is a function of cumulative emissions and thus any less carbon emitted is less cumulative atmospheric carbon (Andreas Malm, [*How to Blow Up a Pipeline*](https://www.versobooks.com/en-gb/products/2649-how-to-blow-up-a-pipeline)), but also that it is impossible to wholly withdraw from complicity and that everyone needs kindness and respite in their lives, and often these arrive—in some capacity—through consumer goods. That things are urgent and dire, and that we all need to be able to live our lives. That I am terrified but that judgement doesn’t help anyone, that things must change but that everyone is on their own journey and learning at their own pace. That the mental whiplash from spending a week off-grid, then returning to the city and its seemingly endless supply of water and electricity from nowhere, has not been exhausted and I still feel its friction.

This writing itself has been done across second- and first-hand devices, machines reliant on cobalt and lithium, whose extractions have left toxicity and dispossession in their wake. It is indebted to labourers that produced these things, the earth for providing the raw materials, other life for pollinating or providing waste, the bodies maintaining the infrastructure that has allowed you to read these words.

In such times, we do need *radical and original extremes of thinking and feeling* (Rob Burbea, ‘[The meditator as revolutionary](https://dharmaseed.org/talks/13850/)’) that ensure we don’t turn away. I won’t pretend that it isn’t hard work to cultivate that, or that is, simply, a job that can be finished.

There are worlds between the endings of worlds. There are worlds between a caring transition and building of resilient, circular and equitable systems, and between an everyone-for-themself race to the bottom. An ending need not be a terrifying path. I firmly believe that *collective healing will be made possible precisely by facing—together—the end of the world as we know it* (Vanessa Machado de Oliveira, *[Hospicing Modernity](https://decolonialfutures.net/hospicingmodernity/)*).

This year I have found myself in a delicate balancing act, trying to learn to hold at once the impermanence of all things and the fact that not all endings are equal. In the former—in the recognition of humanity’s miniscule size in the grand old scheme of things—I find peace, yet in the latter—in the acknowledgement of the black anthropocenes that have underpinned my life in capitalist modernity and the ones still to come—I find a colossal amount of pain and fear. What kind of endings, deaths, and transitions to other forms do we want to cultivate? Somehow, yet, there is also space for possible worlds.

“*All people who know what it is to end should be allowed to continue.*” (The Akjai, in Octavia Butler’s [*Adulthood Rites*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lilith%27s_Brood))